https://www.ssfs.org/about/welcome
Adventurous. Interactive. Love. Joy. Peace. Caring. Safety. Special. When we asked our students to describe Sandy Spring Friends School in just one word, these are the words they chose. If you spend time with us, you will see how much these words truly resonate. Our commitment to experiential learning and a transformative education can be witnessed on any given day. Walking across our beautiful campus, you hear the laughter and chatter of students as they move from building to building and room to room between classes. You feel the intense focus of students taking notes and grappling with robust essential questions, using what they know to build a bridge to what they have yet to discover. You catch teachers pouring over the creation of multi-modal assessments, and coaches getting ready for the team practice before the next big game. You hear the delighted squeals of kindergarteners discovering frogs and tadpoles by the pond, and the harmony of student performers practicing for the upcoming musical. And, on occasion, you can even smell pizza baking in the handmade oven near our active farm. Education at Sandy Spring Friends School here at our home on Norwood Road is a full sensory experience! At SSFS, students and teachers lead and learn together. You’ll find that our students have a voice on important matters, on and off our campus. They cultivate their voices through a dynamic, rigorous curriculum that informs and calls them to action, and through trusted relationships with teachers who see the unique worth in every student. Our Quaker values compel us to work hard at creating a sense of belonging on our campus as we affirm and support the diversity of our students and faculty. And, as good as we are, we also remain open to the quiet moments of reflection that lead to continuing revelation, and new pathways forward.I surely hope that you find your way to Sandy Spring Friends School one day soon. When you do, you’ll find that it is a place where “Way opens” and you can truly “Let your life speak.”Peace,Rodney Glasgow Head of School
https://www.ssfs.org/about/mission-philosophy
Recognizing the unique worth of each person, the School strives to develop individual talents and foster caring and effective citizens of the world. Our Mission StatementSandy Spring Friends School provides a welcoming and nurturing learning community with Friends testimonies and Meeting for Worship central to its life and vitality. A challenging academic curriculum, enriched arts program, inclusive athletics, and service opportunities promote intellectual excellence and strength of character. Recognizing the unique worth of each person, the School strives to develop individual talents and foster caring and effective citizens of the world. PhilosophyThe Religious Society of Friends, also known as Quakers, cherishes the worth and dignity of each individual because we believe that there is that of God in every person. This basic belief inspires Sandy Spring Friends School to value the unique gifts of our students, faculty, and staff while also expecting each person to become a contributing and cooperative member of the community. Believing that personal and academic growth flourish in a setting which nurtures trust and respect, we expect all members of the school community to act with integrity and responsibility in every aspect of their lives. We are convinced that all features of school life should be strongly influenced by the practices and testimonies of the Society of Friends. We stress the Quaker values of service, simplicity, equality, honesty, stewardship of the environment, and the peaceful resolution of conflict, as part of our continual search for Truth.Sandy Spring Friends School develops the trained mind, the skilled hand, and the healthy body within a nurturing community centered in the Life of the Spirit. We provide a challenging academic program combined with stimulating opportunities in the arts, athletics, and community service. Believing Quaker Meeting for Worship to be central to its life and vitality, the School creates opportunities for silent worship, reflection, and the sharing of insights.Sandy Spring Friends School prepares its students for college, to enjoy learning throughout life, and to become useful, constructive, and caring citizens of the world. Our mission is most clearly stated in our motto, words taken from George Fox, the founder of the Society of Friends: "Let Your Lives Speak."--Approved by the Board of Trustees Believing that personal and academic growth flourish in a setting which nurtures trust and respect, we expect all members of the school community to act with integrity and responsibility in every aspect of their lives. Statement on Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Sandy Spring Friends School embraces diversity, equity, justice, and belonging as critical to the fulfillment of our mission. Our Quaker values compel us to practice integrity and to encourage each member of our school to “Let your lives speak.” We encourage an atmosphere of inquiry and reflection into the important and complex issues of human and civil rights. We stand against systemic oppression and discrimination and actively work to eradicate them on our campus and in our world. Our curricular, co-curricular, and extracurricular programming reflect this commitment from the experiences of our earliest learners through their time as our alums, to the on-going education and development of our administration, faculty, staff, parents, and trustees. From this foundation, all members of the school community actively foster a culture of inclusivity that values multiple perspectives and is supported by transformational dialogue and civic engagement. Approved by the Board of Trustees, April 2021
https://www.ssfs.org/about/our-distinctions
Our Distinctions Our school’s culture—rooted in the idea that collaboration engenders achievement—can be traced to our Quaker heritage and abiding belief in Quaker values. Our teachers strive to identify and cultivate each child’s intellectual, extracurricular, and social passions. We call it recognizing “the Light within.” In doing so, we help shape students whose actions speak volumes and whose lives become exemplars—not only among their peers and families today but also in their personal, educational, and professional communities in college and beyond.Six Key Distinctions We asked students, faculty, alumni, and families about distinguishing characteristics they thought made SSFS stand out. Here are six of the characteristics that rose to the top, each one shining a light on our culture, our people, and our educational philosophy.
https://www.ssfs.org/about/fast-facts
Fast Facts  Sandy Spring Friends School is a progressive, coed, college preparatory Quaker school serving students from age three through 12th Grade, with an optional boarding program in the Upper School.  Founded in 1961, SSFS offers a deep and rigorous academic curriculum, character education rooted in universal Quaker principles, and a diverse and international student body that reflects today's global community. SSFS sits on a pastoral 140-acre campus in the heart of Montgomery County, Maryland, midway between Washington D.C. and Baltimore—an ideal setting for intellectual contemplation, athletic training, diverse extracurricular pursuits, outdoor exploration, urban excursion, and personal growth. Address: 16923 Norwood Road, Sandy Spring, MD 20860 Main Phone: (301) 774-7455 Fax: (301) 924-1115 Head of School: Dr. Rodney Glasgow SSFS is approved by the Maryland State Department of Education and is accredited by the Association of Independent Maryland Schools (AIMS). SSFS is also a member of the following associations and organizations:  National Association of Independent Schools (NAIS) Association of Independent Maryland Schools (AIMS) Friends Council on Education (FCE) TABS (The Association of Boarding Schools) CASE (Council for Advancement and Support of Education) Secondary School Admission Test Board (SSATB) Education Records Bureau (ERB) The College Board National Association of College Admissions Counselors Black Student Fund Potomac and Chesapeake Association of College Admissions Counselors (PCACAC) Midway between Washington D.C. and Baltimore 140+ acre campus Instructional organic farm  2 gardens 6 miles of cross-country trails 3 athletic fields Swimming pond 156 Faculty and staff 86 Teaching faculty 23% Employees identify as faculty & staff of color 13 Faculty/staff members are alumni 61 Teaching faculty hold advanced degrees 142 Students in the Lower School (Preschool through Grade 5) 137 Students in the Middle School (Grades 6-8) 329 Students in the Upper School (Grades 9-12) 100 Students enrolled in the Residential Life program 59% Students of color 7% Quaker 19 Countries represented across the school 100% Graduates accepted to a four-year college or university Average class size is 16 8:1 Student-faculty ratio 1958: ESTHER SCOTT DONATES LAND TO BUILD SCHOOL In 1958, Brook Moore suggested a new school for Sandy Spring at the Sandy Spring Monthly Meeting of the Society of Friends. Interest grew, and Esther Scott gave the first of several acres of her family farm to develop a Friends Center and a school seeking to educate the whole person—body, mind, and spirit.   1961: SANDY SPRING FRIENDS SCHOOL OPENS Sandy Spring Friends School opened in September 1961 with a limited enrollment Upper School program for 77 students.   1980: MIDDLE SCHOOL ADDED In 1980, SSFS added a Middle School program in Brookeville, which moved onto campus in February of 1984.  1983: ASHTON MEETING HOUSE MOVED ON CAMPUS In 1983, the historic Ashton Meeting House was moved to the campus. Since then, the School has held Meeting for Worship on a regularly-scheduled basis in the Meeting House. It is a visible reminder of the living Quaker heritage of the School.   1992: LOWER SCHOOL ADDED In 1992, Friends Elementary School moved onto campus, officially merging with SSFS one year later. The following year, the School expanded again to serve students from pre-kindergarten (age 4) through 12th grade.  2005: NEW MIDDLE SCHOOL, ATHLETIC CENTER, AND PERFORMING ARTS BUILDINGS COMPLETED The "Kindle the Spirit" capital campaign, which launched in 2003, enhanced our campus with the construction of three major buildings (the Performing Arts Center, an Athletic Complex, and a new Middle School building). As part of the construction project, the road and parking lots created around the periphery of the campus enabled the interior of our campus to be a pedestrian-only space with a spacious grassy quad at its center.   2016: PRESCHOOL PROGRAM EXPANDED Beginning in the 2016-2017 school year, our  preschool program expanded to further to include three-year-olds, so that SSFS could serve students from age 3 through 12th grade.  2021: NEW UPPER SCHOOL BUILDING COMPLETED Our community gathered on Nov. 12, 2018, for the groundbreaking of our new Upper School building. Construction on the building continued, even while students were in "virtual learning" mode during spring and fall of 2020 due to the Covid-19 pandemic. In January of 2021, SSFS moved to a hybrid instruction mode, and our Upper School "on-campus" students began their second semester in the newly-completed Upper School building. The new Upper School Building is "net-zero ready," and the first in the Montgomery County region to be constructed following the new International Green Construction Code (IgCC). (Find out more about the IgCC standards here. )  The history of Sandy Spring Friends School illustrates the path of self-discovery and individual experience that our students undertake on a daily basis: inquiry, reflection, cooperation, action, refinement and perpetual personal growth.  Sandy Spring Friends School remains a close-knit community: innovative, diverse, welcoming, and rooted in our Quaker heritage. SSFS is a dynamic institution, and we continue to grow and develop. Yet Mary Lil Moore’s words, spoken on the occasion of Sandy Spring’s 20th anniversary and seen at the top of this page, were true at our founding, and are still true today.  "Let Your Lives Speak."  This motto expresses our philosophy of educating all aspects of a person so that their life—in all of its facets—can reveal the unique strengths within.
https://www.ssfs.org/about/quaker-education
A Friends School Education  Quaker education is a 325-year old approach to learning. Bryn Mawr, Haverford, and Swarthmore were all founded as Quaker institutions of higher learning. The founders of Cornell and Johns Hopkins were also inspired by the Quaker approach to education. A Quaker education can be characterized by the following principles*:  Learning through inquiry Learning through reflection Learning through collaboration Learning through service A culture of respect Teachers as partners in the learning process Taken from "Teaching Tolerance and Valuing Diversity," by Irene McHenry, former Executive Director, Friends Council on Education.
https://www.ssfs.org/about/diversity
A Place of Belonging: Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion at SSFS Sandy Spring Friends School is a diverse community committed to fostering equity and belonging for our students, faculty, staff, administrators, trustees, and families. As a community, we actively foster a culture of inclusivity that values multiple perspectives and is supported by transformational dialogue and civic engagement. The Office of Institutional Equity, Justice, and Belonging (OIEJB) at SSFS LaVern Burton - Director of IEJB Hayes Davis - Association Director of IEJB See the OIEJB web page for more information and resources for heritage months, holidays, celebrations, and activities.
https://www.ssfs.org/about/campus
Our Campus We prepare students to create a sustainable future on one of the largest and most beautiful campuses in the region. With 140 acres nestled between Washington D.C. and Baltimore, the serenity of Sandy Spring Friends School is amplified by the nearby bustle. Pastoral, light-filled, and functional, the forested SSFS campus includes academic and administrative buildings, the historic Meeting House, student housing, faculty residences, a state of the art performing arts center, an athletics center (including a fitness center and climbing wall), sports fields, a swimming pond, and an aerial park.  For our students, this is an ideal setting for intellectual contemplation, athletic training, diverse extracurricular pursuits, outdoor exploration, urban excursion and personal growth.
https://www.ssfs.org/about/meet-the-board
Meet the Board About the SSFS Board of Trustees The Board of Trustees is the governing body of Sandy Spring Friends School (SSFS), whose primary responsibilities are to determine and maintain the character of SSFS, establish overall policy, conduct strategic planning, ensure the financial stability of the school, and assess the school's effectiveness in manifesting the mission, philosophy, and vision of SSFS.  In doing its work, the Board is guided by the Quaker testimonies of service, simplicity, equality, integrity, stewardship of the environment, and the peaceful resolution of conflict. The Board also endeavors to follow best practices of boards of trustees of independent schools. In this effort, the Board seeks guidance from the Friends Council on Education, the National Association of Independent School, the Association of Independent Maryland Schools, and the Association of Independent Schools of the Greater Washington Area. Membership of the Religious Society of Friends As required in the Board’s By-Laws, a majority of the Board must be members of the Religious Society of Friends. Eight board members are appointed by the Sandy Spring Monthly Meeting, and four members are appointed by the Baltimore Yearly Meeting. The Board of Trustees appoints the remaining members. Board members are appointed for terms of three years and may be reappointed for one additional term. The Board is organized with several officers including a Clerk, Assistant Clerk, Recording Clerk, and Treasurer. The Board organizes itself into several committees which assist in conducting its work. SSFS Board of Trustees Statement on Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Sandy Spring Friends School embraces diversity, equity, justice, and belonging as critical to the fulfillment of our mission. Our Quaker values compel us to practice integrity and to encourage each member of our school to “Let your lives speak.” We encourage an atmosphere of inquiry and reflection into the important and complex issues of human and civil rights. We stand against systemic oppression and discrimination and actively work to eradicate them on our campus and in our world. Our curricular, co-curricular, and extracurricular programming reflect this commitment from the experiences of our earliest learners through their time as our alums, to the on-going education and development of our administration, faculty, staff, parents, and trustees. From this foundation, all members of the school community actively foster a culture of inclusivity that values multiple perspectives and is supported by transformational dialogue and civic engagement
https://www.ssfs.org/about/employment
Careers Our educators see and hear their students, and encourage them to create lives that speak with quiet and certain confidence.  Founded in 1961, SSFS offers a deep and rigorous academic curriculum, character education rooted in universal Quaker principles, and a diverse and international student body that reflects today's global community. SSFS sits on a pastoral 140-acre campus in the heart of Montgomery County, Maryland, midway between Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, MD—an ideal setting for intellectual contemplation and collaboration, athletic training, diverse extracurricular pursuits, outdoor exploration, urban excursion and personal growth. Our educators are subject matter experts with a continuing thirst for learning. They are progressive; they are kind; they are patient and encouraging; they promote experiential and outdoor learning; they utilize the nearby cities as cultural resources and valuable urban centers; they educate the entire student; they take an active interest in their students, finding meaning and Truth in their lives; they participate in an active decision-making process that involves consensus-building; they respect everyone in a diverse and international setting; and they promote the universal values that form the social fabric of our school. They look for the Light within each child, and respond to their students' styles in ways that support and elicit their best efforts. Education is their passion, and they embrace an environment in which professional development is encouraged. They promote an outstanding academic atmosphere and a safe space in which students, faculty, and parents operate as partners to cultivate academic understanding, social responsibility, and personal growth for all.  If this is the type of individual you are, we would like to talk to you.
https://www.ssfs.org/admission/welcome
Admission Thank You for Starting the Journey With Us. Finding the right school for you and your family is an important process, one that is both equally exciting and challenging as you investigate, reflect on what you've learned, and come to a decision. At Sandy Spring Friends School, we encourage this inquiry-based method of learning—in fact, it's ingrained in our School's educational philosophy.   Although our application deadline has passed for the 2022–2023 school year, we are still accepting applications in all grades. We look forward to working with you as you learn about our admission process and investigate whether Sandy Spring Friends Schools is the right school for your child. Virtual Introductions Prospective families can meet with an admission representative in a small group virtual setting to learn about the admission process, academics, extracurricular activities, a day at SSFS, and opportunities to learn more. Both parents/guardians and students are welcome to attend. Our meeting will be about 45-60 minutes and will include plenty of time for individual questions and answers. Who We Are Across our three divisions, we help students internalize a process we call "QRA"—Question, Reflection, Action—which ensures that they think critically, have opportunities to reflect on and integrate new knowledge, and apply what they learn. Our challenging academic curriculum, enriched arts program, inclusive athletics, and service opportunities promote intellectual excellence, collaboration, and strength of character. Recognizing the unique worth of each person, our faculty and staff strive to challenge each student to reach their potential and develop individual talents.  Sandy Spring Friends School students are engaged in the learning process; enjoy the integration of academics, arts, and athletics; and seek to become constructive, caring and effective citizens of the world. We hope you will join our thriving community of scholars, performers, athletes, artists, thinkers, and doers. Download our Viewbook to get a closer look at all that Sandy Spring Friends School  has to offer! Our Viewbook offers:  Details about our academics program Testimonials from SSFS students and alumni Highlights from our Athletics and Arts program And more!
https://www.ssfs.org/admission/why-ssfs
Why SSFS? At Sandy Spring Friends School, our motto is "Let Your Lives Speak." This motto expresses our philosophy of educating all aspects of a person so that their life—in all of its facets—can reveal the unique strengths within.  As a Quaker School, underlying all that we do is a commitment to the Quaker values of simplicity, equality, honesty, respect, peaceful resolution of conflict, and community involvement. Our values-based education, paired with our strong academic program, allows our students to take what they learn and apply it in useful and meaningful ways. Teachers as Mentors Our teachers develop strong connections with students, allowing for frequent communication and trust-building that cultivates confidence, growth, and a lifelong love of learning. Inquiry-Based Approach At SSFS, we help students internalize a process we call “QRA”--Question, Reflection, Action--which ensures that they think critically, integrate new knowledge, and apply what they learn.   Experience-Based Learning We believe that learning is significantly enriched by experience-based projects and programs. They help develop capable, responsible, and globally-aware students who can apply their learning in useful, practical, and meaningful ways. Community Our diverse, collaborative, nonhierarchical community is strengthened by all-school and cross-divisional activities, an engaged alumni body,  community service activities, and an emphasis on affirming & empowering the individual and examining all points of view. SSFS students are engaged in the learning process; enjoy the integration of academics, arts, and athletics; and seek to become constructive, caring, and effective citizens of the world.
https://www.ssfs.org/admission/visit
The SSFS Admissions Team is excited to provide you with opportunities to hear from our community, see our campus, and discover if Sandy Spring Friends School is the right school for you.  Virtual Introductions    Prospective families can meet with an admission representative in a small group setting to learn about SSFS. The sessions are an hour long and covers the admission process, academics, extracurricular activities, a day at SSFS, and opportunities to learn more. Both parents/guardians and students are welcome to attend. Groups will be small (limited to 5 families). Our meeting will be about 45-60 minutes and will include plenty of time for individual questions and answers.
https://www.ssfs.org/admission/application-process
Applying to SSFS We are pleased that you are considering a Sandy Spring Friends School education for your child. Although our application deadline has passed for the 2022–2023 school year, we are still accepting applications in some grades on a space-available basis. Please feel free to contact one of our Admission Directors if you are interested in exploring SSFS – we look forward to connecting with you!  Our application process will allow you to become familiar with our school, while we have the opportunity to get to know you and your child and help you determine whether SSFS is the right school for your family. Please note that we have modified our admission process due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and will conduct some requirements virtually.  Applying to SSFS is a two-step process: First, submit an inquiry: SUBMIT AN INQUIRY  After your inquiry has been submitted, you will receive an email with instructions on the next steps. Next, apply: START YOUR APPLICATION  In order to start your online application, you must first submit an inquiry to obtain your login and password to the Admission Portal.
https://www.ssfs.org/admission/frequently-asked-questions
When was SSFS founded? In 1961 by S. Brook Moore with the vision to create a school to educate the whole person - body, mind, and spirit. How many students attend SSFS? SSFS enrolls 685 students from Preschool (age 3) to the 12th grade. We have over 60 students in our 5 day and 7 day boarding program. How many students are in each division? Our Lower School has 153 students from Preschool (age 3) to Grade 5. Our Middle School has 180 students in Grades 6-8. Our Upper School, Grades 9-12 with a 5-day & 7-day boarding option, has 325 students. What is the student/teacher ratio? The average student to faculty ratio is 8 to 1. What is the average class size? The average class size is 16. Many classes are smaller than 16; all are characterized by supportive and trusting relationships between students and teachers. How many faculty and staff work at SSFS? There are approximately 170 faculty and staff working at SSFS, each one contributing to a positive educational experience for our students. Does my child have to be Quaker to attend SSFS? How does Quakerism influence the academic and community life at SSFS? No, students do not need to be Quaker to attend SSFS. Quaker values - simplicity, peace, integrity, community, equality, stewardship/service - are incorporated into the daily academic and social curriculum. (See the "What is a Friends Education" section of our website.) What is the religious diversity of the student body? Over a dozen different religions and denominations are represented in the student body. Quakers represent about 7% of our student body. What are the school day hours? What is a typical day? Each division operates on a similar school day schedule. See below for exact times for each division:  The Lower School day begins at 8:10 am and ends at 3:15 pm on Tuesday-Friday. The Lower School day on Monday starts at 8:10 am and ends at 2 pm. The Middle School day begins at 7:55 am and ends at 3:40 pm on Tuesday-Friday. The Middle School day on Monday starts at 7:55 am and ends at 2:40 pm. The Upper School day begins at 7:55 am and ends at 3:40 pm on Tuesday-Friday. The Upper School day on Monday starts at 7:55 am and ends at 2:40 pm. Do you offer bus service? Yes, our buses pick up students from Montgomery, Howard, and Prince George's Counties, as well as the District of Columbia. Routes are point-to-point, not house-to-house. Collection points are designed to accommodate as many families as possible. Routes and schedules are adjusted each year according to changes in ridership. (See Extended Care and Transportation) Do you have a before and aftercare program? Yes, we offer before and aftercare for our Lower School students, and aftercare for Middle School students. Before school care in the Lower School is from 7:30 to 8:00 am. Aftercare runs until 6:30 p.m. in both Lower and Middle School. Kids After Hours runs our Lower School aftercare program. (See Extended Care and Transportation) What athletic teams does Sandy Spring Friends School offer? SSFS is a member of the Potomac Valley Athletic Conference. Our Middle and Upper School teams compete in the following interscholastic sports: soccer, cross country, volleyball, golf, basketball, lacrosse, baseball, softball, track and field, and tennis. Students also have non-competitive fitness options such as athletic conditioning, modern dance, yoga, and weight training. See more in the Athletics section of the website. Approximately how many openings do you anticipate? We will accept applications for all grades. Are any applicants given special consideration? While it is by no means a guarantee of admission, Sandy Spring Friends School does give special consideration to the applicant groups listed below:  Children of Members of the Religious Society of Friends Children of Sandy Spring Friends alumni/ae Children of Sandy Spring Friends employees Current students' siblings Former students in good academic standing Are campus tours available? We encourage families to visit our campus to learn more about the SSFS community. We host regular Open House and Discover SSFS events throughout the year. Click here to see upcoming dates. What is the birthday cut-off date for entering Preschool (age 3), Preschool (age 4), and Kindergarten, Kindergarten? September 1. Applicants to Preschool (age 3) must be 3 years old by this date; Preschool (age 4) must be 4 years old by this date; Kindergarten applicants must be 5 years old. How are admissions decisions made? In keeping with the Quaker process, all admissions decisions are made by committees within the division. Each student application is reviewed with the whole student in mind. Due to the comprehensive nature of the process, all admission decisions are final. Is your Preschool program (ages 3 and 4) a full-day program? Yes, our Preschool program is a full-day, 10-month program with extended day and summer care options. Is financial assistance available? We offer need-based financial aid. The goal is to make a Sandy Spring Friends School education financially accessible to all families. Grants are made solely on the basis of financial need. (See Tuition & Financial Aid.) When is your admissions deadline, and when are applicants notified of admission decisions? Applicants whose files are completed by our January 15th deadline will receive notification of the Admission Committee’s decision by early March. Applicants whose files are not complete by the January 15th deadline will be considered on a space-available basis. What is your financial aid deadline? The financial aid deadline for current families is November 15, 2021. The financial aid deadline for new families is January 15, 2022. The financial aid application and all supporting documents must be received by this date. (See Tuition & Financial Aid.) Will applying for aid affect my child's chances of being accepted? The admissions and financial aid process are two separate processes. SSFS is a need-blind school. A family's ability to pay does not impact the admissions review process. What is the tuition for the 2022-2023 school year? Tuition varies by grade and division. See Tuition and Financial Aid for current rates on our website. Are there fees beyond the tuition? Yes, additional fees may include bus transportation, books, technology, aftercare, and trips. (See Tuition and Financial Aid.) What is the ethnic diversity of the student body? 39% European American, 20% African American, 7% Asian, 4% Latino, 1% Middle Eastern, 14% Multi Racial, and 14% International, 1% Pacific Islander, (2% Undisclosed). How diverse is the faculty and staff at SSFS? 23% of the employees at SSFS identify as faculty and staff of color. What percentage of graduates attend college? 100% of our students apply and are accepted to college.  Some elect to take a gap year. Do you have a 1:1 Technology Program? Yes, SSFS has a 1:1 Program. In preschool-grade 8, the school provides devices for students. For the 2022-2023 school year:  Preschool-1st Grade students use iPads; Grades 2-8 use Chromebooks; Upper School students (grades 9-12) bring their own laptops. More information available on the Technology web page.
https://www.ssfs.org/admission/extended-care-transportation
Transportation & Extended Care Transportation Sandy Spring Friends School offers option bus transportation for the convenience of our parents. Bus routes are offered in Montgomery, Howard, and Prince George’s counties and in Washington, DC, for students starting in kindergarten through 12th grade. Please note that the routes are determined by student need each year and are subject to change.  Buses are scheduled so that they can arrive at SSFS at or before 7:45 am; depending on the route, the first morning pick-up location is between 6:40-7:00 am.    In addition, we offer an afternoon free bus shuttle service each day for middle and upper school students participating in athletics and other after-school activities; this bus departs from the Middle School circle on campus at 5:45 pm to take students to the Glenmont and Shady Grove metro stations.
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/overview
Academics at Sandy Spring Friends School Sandy Spring Friends School is an exceptional school seeking to prepare students for life and further education. At Sandy Spring Friends School, knowing why we learn, and how we learn, are just as important as what we learn. Our educational program is grounded in a deep respect for individual students and intellectual rigor. The School's teachers help students internalize a process we call "QRA"—Question, Reflection, Action—which ensures that they think critically, integrate new knowledge, and apply what they learn. We help students develop their individual sense of purpose as they become caring citizens of the world.  Question Reflection Action Graphic    Question-Reflection-Action QRA—our student-centered approach—encourages students to  question  concepts and ideas,  reflect  upon inquiry and experience, and put learning into  action. Close, cooperative relationships between teachers and students are the firmest foundation for effective learning. Young minds learn best in an environment of trust and respect where each student is valued as a unique, gifted individual. A Sandy Spring Friends education is rigorous. Students are expected to move beyond just memorizing facts to “higher order thinking skills” to analyze, interpret, synthesize, and create. For this reason, multiple-choice tests are uncommon at SSFS. Working within an above-grade-level curriculum, students become skilled at prioritizing and managing academic challenges as they progress from pre-kindergarten to high school graduation. Students learn best when they are acknowledged and included in the classroom. For this reason, SSFS values small class sizes where every voice is heard. At all grade levels, most academic sections have between 10 and 16 students. Sandy Spring Friends students interact with the natural world as a part of their learning environment. Daily routines allow students to be outside as they travel between commitments. The School’s 140-acre campus is a natural laboratory for physical, scientific, and artistic exploration. SSFS seeks to provide students a global perspective. In a world that is increasingly international and cross-cultural, we emphasize our students' development of cultural competence and the ability to view each challenge and opportunity from multiple perspectives. Classroom learning must be authenticated by real-world experience. Signature trips and projects, the Upper School Intersession and Internship programs, and our outdoor education program all reflect our desire the make the world our classroom. The School’s motto, “Let Your Lives Speak,” represents the Quaker belief that how we live our lives is the most direct indicator of what we believe. The School’s programs are grounded in an ethical framework of the six Quaker “SPICES:” simplicity, peaceful resolution of conflict, integrity, community, equality, and stewardship. These guiding values are infused through all areas of study and community life. Students of all ages participate in silent worship/reflection as they explore and develop their own moral compass.
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/experiential-learning
Experiential Learning at SSFS At Sandy Spring Friends School, we believe that learning is significantly enriched by experience-based projects and programs. They help develop capable, responsible, and globally aware students who can apply their learning in useful, practical, and meaningful ways.  INQUIRE OUTDOOR EDUCATION PROGRAM SENIOR PROJECTS UPPER SCHOOL INTERSESSION Experiential Education Across All Three Divisions SSFS students learn about the world by being in the world. Integrated into the fabric of the School, the following represents some of the distinctive high-impact learning experiences offered to our students: Lower School Field Trips that bring classroom curriculum to life Organic and Sustainable Farming Classroom plays and Lower School performances Overnight camping trips in 4th and 5th grade Middle School Grade-level signature trips that tie back to classroom curriculum Summer language immersion trips Middle School arts nights and play Immersion Week with hands-on workshops  Upper School 9th Grade Camping Trip Annual regional, national, and international Intersession Trips Summer Service-Learning Trips Upper School Play and Musical Internships Senior Projects
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/civic-engagement
Civic Engagement Making a difference in our communities doesn't just happen. It takes hard work and motivation. It is the process of becoming informed, learning new skills, and taking part in our civic lives. At Sandy Spring Friends School, our goal is to teach our students how to be accountable for their actions, to take ownership of them, and to act with intention. We encourage our students to be conscious and conscientious citizens who contribute positively to the world around them, and our School fosters the skills needed to do this effectively.  Community-Based Education to Foster Globally-Aware Citizens At Sandy Spring Friends, we believe that an education rooted in community encourages our students to become globally-aware citizens who can become self-sustaining, empathetic, and respectful individuals in our ever-changing society and world. What does Civic Engagement look like in the classroom? At our school, civic engagement occurs in many forms. It could be an advisory discussion, classroom discussion, open forum, a query at Meeting for Worship, or an assembly around a social or political topic. It could be a service-learning trip, a gathering that raises awareness, or a fundraiser that generates resources for a certain cause. Engagement in local and national elections and legislation, responding to natural disasters and civil unrest, educating about and advocating against discrimination, inequity, and lack of access to resources, and grappling with issues of human and civil rights are all examples of civic engagement that we might see in our school community. Civility in Civic Engagement: What are the community norms? We value civic engagement and respect the diversity of thoughts, opinions, and experiences that exist within our school community.  As our students actively engage in political and social issues on campus, off campus, and virtually, all members of our community do so with the following norms:  Listen to understand, and reflect before responding. Speak from the “I” perspective. Model and make room for authenticity. Expand your capacity to honor multiple perspectives by challenging the ideas of others, and accepting challenges to your own ideas, with grace and civility aimed at clarity. Question, discern, and question more, allowing for continuing revelation. Accept discomfort as an important part of the learning process. Assume positive intent while addressing negative impact. Civic Engagement Through Self-Advocacy Sandy Spring Friends School is deeply committed to civic engagement through our mission to “Let Your Lives Speak.”  By fostering critical thinkers and compassionate self-advocates, our students become changemakers in their community and in the world.  READ: 5 Ways To Help Your Student Develop Self-Advocacy LISTEN: Gnu Stories Podcast | Episode 11: Let Your Lives Speak: Self-Advocacy For All Ages Civic Engagement: Key Skills Civic engagement allows our students to develop and practice key skills for leadership and life-long learning. Specifically, civic engagement encourages:  Active listening and inquiry Deep reflection and analytical thought Considering evidence and counter-evidence collaboratively Creative problem-solving where teachers partner with students in the learning process Ability to see, understand, and hold multiple perspectives fostered by a culture of respect
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/preschool
Preschool at Sandy Spring Friends School Nurturing the Innate Curiosity of Young Minds through Play & Exploration. Research shows that play is a powerful tool for learning. That's why at Sandy Spring Friends School, play-based learning is woven into the preschool curriculum through fun hands-on activities both in the classroom and outside on our beautiful campus and natural playground. Our exceptional, caring teachers create a welcoming environment for our littlest ones so they can feel safe exploring the world around them while embarking on a lifetime of joyful learning.  At Sandy Spring Friends School we pair child-initiated inquiry with teacher-supported learning to provide students in our play-based preschool program with the educational foundation they need in order to effectively acquire knowledge. Through play, social interactions, and an immense focus on social-emotional learning, students are able to build skills that promote growth and development, leading to a successful transition into kindergarten and beyond. " Chanelle Broughton Assistant Head of Lower School, Director of Preschool Play-Based Learning Whether outdoors on our natural playground or in the classroom, our preschool offers numerous opportunities for play throughout the day. Play is the child’s emotional, physical, social, and cognitive work. As our preschoolers play, they develop motor skills while exercising, and build social skills while playing and exploring with friends. Cognitively, play allows for the development of language and creative thinking that promotes problem-solving. School-Ready Through Life Skills Through our play-based learning model, our preschool program emphasizes academic, social, and emotional growth that prepares our preschoolers for kindergarten and beyond. Our teachers are committed to helping each child feel a sense of belonging in the classroom as they foster a passion for lifelong learning, help students develop compassion for others, and allow each child to find their voice and "Let Their Lives Speak." Quaker Values In keeping with our Quaker belief that there is "that of God in everyone," we honor the unique gifts within each child. We focus on every student’s academic, physical, social, emotional, and spiritual growth. By emphasizing the individual strengths of our students, we nurture their sense of self-worth and give them the confidence to take risks within a safe and supportive environment. Additionally, our highly-skilled teachers are trained in a curriculum called Faith & Play™, which introduces the history of Quakerism and the teaching of Quaker values inherent in our educational philosophy through storytelling and play.
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/lower-school
Sandy Spring Friends Lower School Nurturing the Innate Curiosity of Young Minds through Exploration. At Sandy Spring Friends School, we believe students learn best when creative thinking, active listening, and positive interactions are reinforced in the classroom. Through close collaboration between teachers and peers, students develop a deep love of learning. Our students learn to shape questions about concepts and ideas, reflect upon their learning, and put their learning into action, developing initiative and self-advocacy skills in the process. We seek daily to create an environment in which children can follow their curiosity into experimentation and engagement, applying their energy to full participation in collaborative learning, hands-on activities, and opportunities for academic enrichment.  Global Citizenship Our dedication to celebrating diversity, nurturing awareness, and inspiring compassion among our students sustains our community of global citizens. Through our emphasis on peaceful conflict resolution, community service, and a deep commitment to environmental stewardship, our Lower School students become involved and invested in making a positive impact on the world community.  Learn how we help our children become global citizens:  Community Service Curriculum Guide: Peace Education Intentional Community Lower School students are encouraged to be responsible and responsive listeners and fully present members of a community. Through active listening and interactive modeling, they demonstrate their understanding and readiness to learn. By allowing every person to have a voice and a chance to shine, they recognize that each of their fellow students should be respected for their ideas, experiences, and expertise.  Learn about the programs and activities that strengthen our community ties:  Student Leadership Building Community Across Three Divisions Quaker Values In keeping with our Quaker belief that there is "that of God in everyone," we honor the unique gifts within each child. We focus on every student’s academic, physical, social, emotional, and spiritual growth. By emphasizing the individual strengths of our students, we nurture their sense of self-worth and give them the confidence to take risks within a safe and supportive environment.     Learn more about Quaker or "Friends" Education:  What is a Friends Education?  More About Sandy Spring Friends  Lower School Sandy Spring Friends Lower School—a private elementary school—is located close to a number of communities including Silver Spring, Olney, Gaithersburg, Rockville, Columbia, and Laurel. We are conveniently located off the ICC (Exit 13). Our Lower (Elementary) School begins in Preschool (Age 3) and continues to 5th grade.
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/middle-school
Sandy Spring Friends Middle School An inclusive community where students feel supported while taking on big challenges. Sandy Spring Friends Middle School offers a strong academic program that is taught by dynamic teachers and emphasizes critical thinking, global-mindedness, and problem solving. Within a safe environment that combines challenging academics with a welcoming space for students to explore, our students are able to fully experience and enjoy their Middle School years. "Rooted in Quaker values, our program allows students to access and thrive in the academic program by creating spaces for students to feel comfortable within their classroom setting." David Blake Head of Middle School Academic Excellence At SSFS, students experience a progressive, academically-challenging college preparatory program infused with Quaker values. Our curriculum is taught through a seven-day rotating block schedule, which allows for longer periods of class time and provides opportunities for both in-depth discussion and applied or hands-on learning. The low faculty-to-student ratio in our Middle School classes enables us to use an interdisciplinary approach to teaching such that lessons become applicable in many areas of the school day.  Learn more about our education model:  Academics at SSFS Student Empowerment & Support The development of leadership, self-advocacy, and self-regulatory skills are essential parts of our program and are embedded in every area of Middle School life, as we encourage our students to use their voices to be advocates for ideas and principles in a way that works for them. Because our students are empowered with a great deal of responsibility, our faculty and staff provide plenty of support to develop the skills needed to manage these responsibilities successfully.  Learn more about our leadership opportunities:  Middle School Student Leadership Quaker Values Quakerism is conveyed through our weekly Meetings for Worship, in advisory group discussions, and through lessons provided by the student led committees. At the same time, the lessons of Quakerism are infused in every area of the program. Our program recognizes that each student brings a unique set of similarities to and differences from their classmates; it is our task to create a space where they feel comfortable with both.  Learn more about Quaker or "Friends" Education:  What is a Friends Education?
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/upper-school
Sandy Spring Friends Upper School Academically rigorous, socially aware – our Upper School students gain the tools needed to be exemplars in college and beyond. The Sandy Spring Upper School develops confident, responsible, thoughtful people who understand the wider world and seek to make a difference in it. We supply our graduates with the intellectual and interpersonal skills that help them thrive in a rapidly changing, increasingly global community. Led by an extraordinary faculty, we are a dynamic, interactive community committed to expanding students’ academic, artistic, athletic, social, and spiritual education "By promoting a culture of mutual respect and trust between teachers & students, we challenge our students to take intellectual risks and move beyond their perceived boundaries to explore a wide spectrum of interests and activities." Jonathan Oglesbee Head of Upper School Challenge, Exploration, Growth Through academically rigorous courses, including APs in each discipline, we challenge every learner to achieve at the highest levels. Additionally, our strong arts and athletics programs nurture important habits of mind—risk-taking, problem-solving, cooperation, and perseverance; combined with leadership opportunities - including student government and peer counseling - our students are able to gain the skills needed to be successful in college and beyond.  Learn more about our offerings:  Academics at SSFS Student Leadership Global Perspective As global citizens, our Upper School students value global connectedness, strive to be good stewards to the earth, and give back through service.  Students become immersed in the world and gain cross-cultural understanding through our Intersession and Summer Service trips. With a robust Residential Life program, represented by over 60 countries across the globe, students are able to continue their exchange of ideas and build their global perspective right on our campus.  Learn how we help our students gain a global perspective:  Experiential Learning Boarding Life at SSFS Outdoor Education Quaker Values Underlying all that we do in the Upper School is a commitment to the Quaker values of simplicity, equality, honesty, respect, peaceful resolution of conflict, and community involvement. Students practice reflection, engage in cooperative decision-making, and demonstrate meaningful community membership in Meeting for Worship.  Learn more about Quaker or "Friends" Education:  What is a Friends Education?
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/college-counseling
The College Counseling Department at Sandy Spring Friends School helps students transition successfully from SSFS into higher education, and achieve their personal and professional goals.  The college counseling staff is committed to ensuring that every student and family receives the necessary support required to design and implement a successful plan for college. We want to enable our students to transition successfully from SSFS into higher education, and to achieve their personal and professional goals. The college staff works in collaboration with students, families, and faculty to facilitate the process.  We traditionally begin meeting and working with juniors in December, and support them throughout their senior year and beyond. Every student is given individualized attention through one-on-one counseling sessions, and each is encouraged to create their own path to college. We also meet with families and offer a series of college workshops, panel discussions, and information sessions throughout the school year.  The college counseling staff holds the belief that there is a school for every student, and one of our primary tasks is to help them to identify their needs and goals for college in order to help make the best possible choice.
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/library
Inquiry Guides The library and educational technology specialists, known as Inquiry Guides (or IG Team for short),  guide the SSFS community of learners in becoming caring and intentional users of ideas and information. It is in unity with both our brand pillars as well as SSFS’s mission statement.  About Our Library The Caroline Hallowell Worth Memorial Library in Yarnall Hall offers an inviting space for independent research, group work, and special events. Used by all three division, our library program seeks to foster a life-long love of learning while helping students foster age-appropriate 21st century skills. With resources available in print or in digital format, students and faculty have access to the tools they need whether they’re on campus, at home, or out exploring the world.  Our Library features:  Electronic collections, accessible both on- and off-campus Access to the Maryland Digital eLibrary Consortium Four full-time and Inquiry Guides that serve as a bridge between the traditional and the technological Two study rooms with tables and whiteboards for  students to use during the day, as well as for our dorm students to use during evening study halls School supplies to help students complete class projects and homework Tables and reading nooks for studying
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/learning-resource-collaborative-lrc
Learning Support At SSFS The Learning Resource Collaborative (LRC) is a partnership of professionals at Sandy Spring Friends School committed to the competency, success, and joy of all learners in the SSFS community.  SSFS recognizes that some students, even highly capable learners, may need additional academic supports, such as organizational assistance or learning/processing accommodations, to fully develop their natural talents. Through these supports, students create not only academic success but also develop self-awareness, self-advocacy, and independence. The Learning Resource Collaborative at SSFS is designed to help provide and monitor these supports. Flex Program at SSFS The Flex Program for Upper School students incorporates a coaching model that is adaptable to the age and needs of the student. This supplemental program is intended to complement the academic supports given to students by their teachers and advisors.  What is the Learning Resource Collaborative? The Learning Resource Collaborative (LRC) is a partnership of professionals at Sandy Spring Friends School committed to the competency, success, and joy of all learners in the SSFS community. It is a comprehensive, multi-disciplinary student support system that serves as an expanded program for supporting student learning in both the day and residential programs in order to empower students for college and beyond. In-School Student Services The Learning Resource Collaborative provides the following core services to SSFS students and their families:  Consultation with parents, students, teachers, and outside professionals about learning needs Assistance with the identification of learning differences Development of strategies with students to help them adapt to their learning styles Referrals to outside resources (tutors, speech and language therapists, psycho/educational testing services, etc.) as needed Support for teachers for implementing recommendations and accommodations Ongoing faculty/student workshops and training on how students learn and study    In addition, SSFS provides the following  student supports and services (which may vary by division):  Small class sizes Academic Help & Tutorial times built into the daily academic schedule Advisory groups Licensed counselors in each division, and in the dorm Learning specialists in each division Peer Writing Center (Upper School) In-class accommodations Support for standardized testing accommodations Multifaceted, individualized college counseling support
https://www.ssfs.org/academics/technology
technology In a rapidly-changing technological world, our teachers not only integrate technology into our project-based learning activities, we also foster a learning mindset that prepares our students for the future. At Sandy Spring Friends School, technology is integrated by teachers in project-based learning assignments across the curriculum for each grade level. Laptops, Chromebooks, and iPads are used extensively as tools for exploration, collaboration, and as a demonstration of our students’ learning. Students use teacher-selected apps and online resources as learning tools to help them acquire important, developmentally-appropriate learning skills in exciting new ways. Across all three divisions, students utilize technology to create dynamic presentations in their classes by creating videos, presentations, podcasts, and more. Additionally, our faculty offer hands-on learning opportunities for students including coding, game design, robotics, and computer science. 1:1 Program Every student at SSFS has a personal iPad, Chromebook or Laptop to use during classes and to complete school work. Lower School uses iPads in the youngest grades and Chromebooks beginning in grade 2. Middle School also uses Chromebooks. Our Upper School has a Bring Your Own Device program, also known as "BYOD." All students in the Upper School must have a device available on a daily basis for school work. Technology Resources In addition to our 1:1 program, Sandy Spring Friends School also maintains the following resources:  Campus-wide wifi network   Makerspaces for each division   Video & Photo production labs   Fully-equipped theater production facility   Digital projection  in each classroom Loaner laptops as needed   Printing facilities in each classroom building   School-provided email address for grades 5-12   LMS (Learning Management System) for all students   SIS (Student Information System) for all students and their parents/guardians
https://www.ssfs.org/arts/overview
Our Arts Program From the first days of preschool to our 12th grade graduation ceremony, the arts are a vital and integral part of our students' academic experience.  The Sandy Spring Friends School Arts Department seeks to expose each student to many artistic disciplines. Through a sequential and cumulative curriculum, students are encouraged to develop a lifelong relationship with artistic expression.  Our Arts Program provides study of many art forms for the historical and cultural contributions of their canons, for their relationship to society, and for their importance to an individual's spiritual and intellectual growth. With clearly defined content and learning objectives, our arts curriculum can enable students to examine both visual and performing arts as integral parts of daily life, creating a common language with which students communicate and interpret the world.  Students enhance their knowledge, skills, creative expression, and personal values through multi-sensory experiences. By actively involving the students as observers, listeners, organizers, creators, and evaluators, the arts curriculum gives students the opportunity to become capable crafts-persons, able to express themselves and their views within their areas of artistic interest. Our goal is to provide a technical framework, opening the door for the artistic process. Upper School Arts classes, including modern dance, ceramics, weaving, and fine art. Middle School Arts Nights, highlighting all artistic forms including fine arts, music, movement, and more. Lower School plays, including a pre-primary play for preschoolers and kindergarteners. Performing Arts events across all three divisions.
https://www.ssfs.org/arts/performing-arts
Performing Arts The Performing Arts are an important component of the educational experience at SSFS. Our performing arts program is designed to stimulate creative expression, build skills, instill confidence, and enhance appreciation for a variety of performance styles from cultures around the globe. Students are offered numerous exciting opportunities to engage in music, theatre, dance, and multimedia experiences in every grade.  Students from all divisions also have the opportunity to participate in our annual Community Play where they perform with faculty, staff, parents, alums, and school trustees. Please visit our division websites for more details about our performing arts programs and performance schedules. Lower School Lower School students take music classes twice a week, where they listen to a variety of musical works, sing, dance, play instruments, learn to read music, and experiment with movement and improvisation.  All our Lower School students participate in annual class plays and assembly programs. Many of the students participate in the creation process, helping to adapt or write their own plays, choreograph numbers, build sets, and more.     Middle School In the sixth grade students take music, drama, and movement courses (in addition to visual arts offerings) for one quarter each. They then work to create an interdisciplinary art performance titled "The Sixth Grade Workshop."    Seventh and eighth grade students are given a choice of Music, Drama, and movement—along with visual arts class offerings—and they are expected to take two different semester length classes each year.  All Middle School students have the option to perform in or work on the annual middle school play. In addition, chorus and instrumental ensemble are available to all Middle School students.      Upper School Students in grades 9-12 have the opportunity to take a wide range of performing arts classes including: musical production, play production, instrumental music, chorus, handbells, modern dance, theatre, and video production.  Public performances and assembles are scheduled throughout the year for students to share their talents and for the community to enjoy. Traditionally, the Upper School Play is performed in the fall, and the Upper School Musical in the spring.
https://www.ssfs.org/arts/visual-arts
Through our visual arts program, students are challenged and encouraged to engage in visual thinking and expand their avenues of self-expression. Visual art is an integral part of education at Sandy Spring Friends School, where students are offered a broad range of stimulating experiences at every grade level. Across all divisions, students are challenged and encouraged to engage in visual thinking on a daily basis. Students have opportunities to expand their avenues of self-expression by learning the craft of a wide range of visual mediums such as drawing, painting, print making, sculpture, ceramics, weaving, photography, digital graphics, and woodworking. Students are exposed to artwork and artists from around the globe, learning about their historical, cultural, and social significance. Our art classes give students the opportunity to explore subjects and themes from their academic classes, expanding modes of thinking and expression of ideas. Gallery spaces all across our beautiful campus, both inside and outside, allow students to share their work and appreciate the work of their peers. Our resident artist program and trips to the wonderful galleries in the Washington/Baltimore region add to the richness of our program. SSFS graduates are accepted into some of the nations finest art schools and have gone into careers and related fields such as graphic design, architecture, fashion design, interior design, fine woodworking, and digital animation.  Middle School students are challenged to express ideas through digital media technology by using a wide range of programs and applications to create images, photographs, websites, and more.
https://www.ssfs.org/arts/facilities
Fine Arts Facilities Sandy Spring Friends School offers outstanding facilities for our visual and performing arts programs that ensure our students excel as they hone their craft and build their creative self-expression.  Our Arts Facilities include: Visual art studios for each division Gallery space Photography studio Ceramics studio Dance studio  Woodworking studio Sunken auditorium with an orchestra pit State of the art sound and lighting boards Computer graphics classroom CAMPUS AS A CLASSROOM: From creating murals on building to practicing dance outdoors, our students take full advantage of our beautiful 140+ acres as they grow as artists.Practice rooms with musical equipment. Seats in our Performing Arts Center. Classrooms dedicated to artistic pursuits including a  photography lab, ceramics studio, weaving room, and a computer graphics classroom. Person capacity in our Clifton Auditorium.
https://www.ssfs.org/arts/community-play
Community Play The annual SSFS Community Play is a rich opportunity for students, parents, faculty, staff, alums, trustees, and others who are closely tied to the school community to enjoy working together to produce a play or musical. Begun in 1994 by Upper School Arts teacher Bruce Evans and currently directed by Upper School Arts teacher Julie Borsetti, the Community Play is recognized as a signature extracurricular program. It delivers a quality theater experience that is both entertaining and educational for both participants and audience.  Previous Community Plays Past Community Plays have included large musical  productions such as The Sound of Music and Fiddler on the Roof, as well as small-cast shows and original productions, such as the 2019 production of Seed Corn. See photos below from our most recent Community Play production in 2020 - Matilda. The 2021 Community Play: Virtual Vignettes! LIVE Show: Feb. 12, 2021 | Last Chance On-Demand: February 13, 2021
https://www.ssfs.org/arts/empty-bowl-project
Empty Bowl Project In 2005, a small group of teachers and parents the brought Empty Bowl Project to Sandy Spring Friends School. The goal of the project is to:  Create lasting social change Raise awareness of world hunger Collect money to support programs to feed the hungry Build community In the years since the SSFS community began the Empty Bowl Project, the School has hosted 7 dinners, raising more than $50,000 to feed the hungry in our area. These efforts have been supported by hundreds of volunteers from our community who have created thousands of beautiful, hand-painted bowls, and local restaurants and volunteer chefs who have provided thousands of servings of soup and bread.Let Your Lives Speak: Service Through Empty Bowl Hunger and food insecurity affects all people in the U.S. of all ages and 1 in 4 people face hunger in America. Please join us and support this important community event in some way.  Our most recent biannual dinner was held in 2018. Check the weekly newsletters to find out about upcoming bowl-making and glazing sessions and plans for the next event. Empty Bowl History In 1990, the Empty Bowl Project was conceptualized by John Harton, an art teacher from Michigan, as a way to help his students creatively support a food drive. He had his class make ceramic bowls and invited the community to come have a simple dinner, with food donated by local restaurants. From there, the idea was born. Those first diners did not even know that they were going to take home the bowl that they had just used for soup, as a reminder of all the empty bowls that still need filling, every night, around the world.  This concept began a movement and now there are Empty Bowl events held around the world. While each is unique, they share a common purpose and that is to raise awareness about the acute problem of hunger worldwide. Why and Where do the proceeds from the Empty Bowl go? When my kids were little, I remember more the problem of finding calm time to give them a good breakfast before the mad rush out the door (homework, gloves and boots in hand) than a difficulty in finding something nutritious to give them. That problem was more likely I hadn’t made it to the grocery store, not that I couldn’t. Though I certainly have had my share of empty bank accounts and mismatched left over specials.  Working and living in affluent Montgomery and Howard counties, I am fortunate to love my job that helps make ends meet. I have rarely, truly, come face to face with hunger. Similarly, many of our children, like the majority in these counties, have not faced or experienced food insecurity. My students are all loved, carefully cared for, and for the most part, the beneficiaries of an affluent segment of society. They might not get breakfast, or they might only have time to eat it on the drive to school, or they might not like their Starbucks breakfast selection, but for the most part, if they come into the classroom breakfast-less, it was not because their pantry was empty along with the bank account, but that they chose not to partake. However, just across the street, around the corner, or hidden under the unprovoked outburst on the playground; hunger is right here. 7.3% in Howard County, 6.3% in Montgomery County, generally assumed to be affluent communities, and 14.4% in Prince George’s County are food insecure. That means that they do not know from where or if their next meal will come at all. Their families have to choose between rent, food, or gas to get to work; scant nutritious meals or insufficient poorer quality meals. Most of these families have two working parents, and are still not making ends meet. 13% of all Americans are food insecure, 13 million of them are children, and 50% of all school children in the United States are food insecure!!!  The future is indeed bleak if our hopes for the future, our children, cannot learn, question, solve, or grow to their full potential. This impacts not just us but our well-fed children as well. Medical and technological innovations and advances may suffer if the potential of the brilliant minds of the future languishes without the availability and nutrition of regular meals.  Many school districts provide breakfast for all their students during class time, so kids are not stigmatized and pulled out of class. Backpacks, similar to those that carry markers and books, are filled with food for weekends for those in need. Many schools have on-site pantries, while others open their cafeterias over the summer and holiday breaks for families to come have meals. There are food banks and food pantries all over the country, 60,000 + of them, and neighborhoods and churches try to fill in the blanks. The Maryland Food Bank, alone, provides 102,000 meals a day! Empty Bowl is just one of many other ways people are coming together to help alleviate the hunger crisis. But all of these measures are just a drop in the bucket. We need to continue to fight, to try, to help, to solve this crisis, all while teaching the next generation to be generous with their time and hearts.  The EB Committee and TORCH has worked to re-evaluate and find a worthy charity to direct whatever funds garnered during our dinner. Upon their research, Feeding America (FA) was again chosen for this year. The Maryland Food Bank, Manna and SOME are all affiliates of FA, but because of their huge size and donation base, FA is a very effective organization, able to do more for less. Feeding American was chosen for its excellent rating, track record and service to administrative cost ratio. All statistics were garnered from Charity Navigator, American Hunger Statistics, Feeding America, and the Maryland Food Bank.
https://www.ssfs.org/athletics/athletics-at-ssfs
Our Athletics Program At Sandy Spring Friends School, our athletics program focuses on creating balance and developing skills that will help on and off the field. As students participate in sports and physical education, they learn how to set long-term goals and be dedicated to them, learn how to problem solve in the midst of pressure-filled situations, and learn to recognize the importance of honest effort, competition, contribution, and sportsmanship. Our Middle School and Upper School student athletes compete in the Potomac Valley Athletic Conference (PVAC).  Since 2015, our Wildebeests (or 'Beests) teams have won the following PVAC championships:  2015 Baseball Champions 2015 Baseball Tournament Champions 2015 PVAC Girls Middle School Cross Country Champions 2016 Boys Basketball Tournament Champions 2016 Baseball Champions 2016 Baseball Tournament Champions 2017 Boys Basketball Champions 2017 Boys JV Basketball Champions 2018 Boys Middle School Cross Country Champions 2018 Girls Middle School Cross Country Champions 2018 Boys Basketball Champions 2018 Boys Basketball Tournament Champions 2018 Men’s Cross Country Independent School Maryland State Champions 2019 Girls Middle School Basketball Champions 2019 Girls Basketball Tournament Champions 2019 Girls Basketball North Division Champions 2021  Girls Middle School Cross Country Champions 2021 Boys Middle School Cross Country Champions 2021 Women's Cross Country Champions
https://www.ssfs.org/athletics/outdoor-education-at-ssfs
Outdoor Education is an integral part of our academic curriculum and an extension of our core values. With 140+ acres of land, our campus offers a variety of outdoor education opportunities—from exploring natural habitats and ecosystems in our pond, to practicing sustainable agriculture on our farm, to hiking and camping in our old-growth forest. Through off-campus trips, we offer experiential, hands-on opportunities to bring the classroom curriculum to life. Curricular Components of Outdoor Education Teachers across all three divisions expand learning beyond the traditional four walls, offering age- and developmentally-appropriate outdoor educational opportunities for our students to interact with the natural world, develop outdoor living skills, and become stewards of the environment.  Overnight Trips Our School introduces outdoor education through overnight signature trips beginning in 4th Grade and continuing through their time in the Upper School. Our core trips are as follows:  4th Grade - On-Campus Overnight 5th Grade - On-Campus Overnight 6th Grade - Sandy Point (Two Days/ One Night) 7th Grade - Gettysburg (Three Days/ Two Nights) 8th Grade - Assateague (Three Days/ Two Nights) 9th Grade - Ninth Grade Trip (Five Days/ Three Nights) 9th-12th Grade - Intersessions (Ranging from five to 14 days) Outdoor Education Courses,  Electives, Clubs, and More! Each division at SSFS offers several Outdoor Education opportunities, including curriculum units, for-credit courses, electives, and after-school clubs. Examples of some of the outdoor education courses, electives, and clubs include: Lower School Leaf Walk in Kindergarten Tree Study and Hike in 2nd Grade Oregon Trail Reenactment (Hiking) in the 4th Grade Farming Club Rock Climbing Unit in P.E. Middle School Composting and Sustainable Agriculture in the 7th Grade Stream & Watershed Science in the 6th grade Environmental Stewardship Committee Farming Club Upper School Wildflower Identification in US Biology Farming For Fitness Course Competitive Rock Climbing   Rock Climbing Elective Hiking and Biking Club Sandy Spring Friends School provides two all-school events that emphasize the environmental stewardship aspect of our outdoor education—Community Day and Our People, Our Planet Day.    Community Day, a longstanding tradition at SSFS, is a day when when all students, faculty, and staff set aside a day to serve, play, and reflect together. The day begins with a walk to the Sandy Spring Monthly Meeting House, where we have all-school Meeting for Worship. Upon returning to campus, we divide into cross-division "Family Groups" for crafts and bonding time. Then the groups participate in on-campus community service work projects—including farming and trail maintenance— as a part of our commitment to environmental stewardship. After lunch, we gather together again for Morley games and an all-school photo.  Our People, Our Planet Day is a day dedicated to a dual focus of environmental literacy and greater understanding of the unique social, global, and cultural composition of all SSFS community members. Students across all three divisions participate in a variety of environmental stewardship efforts,  including harvesting vegetables from our community farm, testing the water quality of Sandy Spring, to calling and canceling catalogs and junk mail to prevent paper waste.
https://www.ssfs.org/athletics/morley-games
Morley Games Former SSFS faculty member Barry Morley created cooperative team games with fun names such as Friedelfrappe, Frazleerham, Brindledorph, Hoop-a-Doop and Nurdleybawl in the 1960s and 70s as a way for our small, growing student population to participate in team sports. Although the School is now large enough to field more traditional team sports, SSFS students still enjoy these fun and cooperative team sports. Morley Games are offered as a PE course in the Upper School, and students from all divisions traditionally play Morley Games together in the afternoon of Community Day. Morley Games Booklet Learn more about the Morley Games History and the creator Barry Morley in our Morley Games Booklet. The booklet also includes printable versions of the rules for each Morley game. I was never athletic as a teen (or as a middle-aged woman) but the games were a significant part of the culture back in the 70’s. When my partner and I opened up a new community shortly after Barry died and were searching for a name, we chose “Brindledorf.” We wanted to keep it fun, co-operative, and to remember Barry and the community at SSFS.  Sue Eynon Lark, Class of 1976 How To Play: Brindledorph    For quick access, click on the section below: Equipment • Field • Description of the Game • Rules of the Game • General Positioning of the Players     Equipment  One volleyball Brooms which have the straw section cut off just below the lacing Eight markers (poles) approximately four feet high, made from ends of broom handles anchored in cement molds    Field The field has no boundaries. There are two goals at either end of the field, 50-75 yards apart. Each of the goals is formed from four poles set approximately 10 feet apart. (See diagram on next page)     Description of the Game There are two teams of 6-8 players each. Each player holds a broom and attempts to score by hitting the volley ball through the goal. A unique aspect of the game is that scores may be made through the front or the back of the goal.     Rules of the Game How to move the ball: the ball may be hit with the broom; the ball may not be moved in any other way.  Scoring: There are three (3) ways to score:  Hit the ball through either of the openings “A” in your goal which is defended by the opposing team (a team’s offensive direction). This counts 2 points. (See diagram on next page)  Hit the ball through opening “B” in your goal which is defended by the opposing team (a team’s offensive direction). This counts 3 points. (See diagram below) Hit the ball through openings “A” or “B” from behind the goal by the team defending that goal (that teams’ offensive direction). This counts 1 point. (See diagram) Brindledorph Field Diagram       General Positioning of the Players To begin the game, a coin is tossed and the winning team captain may make the choice of which teams will begin with possession of the ball or direction of attack. The team captain who loses the toss then gets the remaining choices of direction of attack or which team gets possession of the ball. Frazleerham was written up in Sports Illustrated in the early 70&rsquo;s. Never read it, but Barry thought they did a good job describing it. I was never on the Fraz roster for the world games (the only sport I officially joined was Nurdleybawl - Go Valkyries!), but Frazleerham became my favorite. Nurdleybawl was a spring sport (of course) and we played Fraz in the winter. Our Spanish teacher developed the offensive upperarm shot that was great. You could use it either from far out and lob it over the defense in front of the rham, or play it close in for a quick scoring tap to the snapper.  John Y. Hartge, Class of 1972 How To Play: Frazleerham   For quick access, click on the section below: Equipment • Field • Description of the Game • Rules of the Game • Violations and Fouls • Substitutions • Advantages of the Game    Equipment Two square pens (rhams) made of wood 10-12 feet in length on each side.  The top of the pen is 2 feet from the ground. (PVC pipe and elbows were used in 2006 to construct two rhams.  At least one alumnus designed a portable rham to take to college with him.) Two large round buckets, about 14” tall, make up the goal within the rham held by the frazsnapper.  A round bucket is crucial for this game. (Trash cans were originally used.) One soccer or volleyball.   Field The field has no boundaries.  The only official dimension is the placement of the pens 60 yards apart from the back of one rham to the back of the other rham.  Any variation which suits the players, the number of players, and the conditions is encouraged.     Description of the Game Frazleerham is a fast moving field game involving running, throwing, catching and physical contact.  A unique aspect of the game is that the goalie (frazsnapper) does the scoring by catching the ball in the bucket, while inside the rham.  The rest of the team distributes themselves around the field to their own best advantage.  Frazleerham Field  Players: There are two teams of 8-11 players.  Each team has a player, known as the frazsnapper, positioned inside the rham at the opposite end of the field with the round bucket. To begin the game: T A coin toss is used to select receiving the ball first or which side of the field to defend.  The captain of the team winning the coin toss chooses possession of the ball or defense of one end of the field.  The captain of the team losing the coin toss selects the remaining choice, i.e. direction of the attack or which team gets possession of the ball.  (Tradition dictates that the captain winning the toss first be given the choice of the coin or a surprise.  It is important that the surprise be more enticing than the coin.  The losing captain then gets what is left over.  The surprise is frequently something the entire team can share.  You are encouraged to think of surprising surprises. The game is started by the frazsnapper of the team with possession of the ball, punting from within the rham towards his/her own players at the opposite end of the field. Initial positioning of the players:  Each team positions itself behind an imaginary line running through the front of the rham they are defending (the rham containing the frazsnapper of the opposing team). The game ends at an agreed upon time (usually 8 minute quarters, running time, excluding stoppage time for injuries and referee explanations).    Rules of the Game Scoring  Each score is worth one point.  There are two ways of scoring:  1.    Receive the ball by catching it and then bouncing it off of the ground from outside the rham over the railing of the rham and having your frazsnapper catch it in the bucket.  This is known to connoisseurs of the game as the Direct Indirect Method. 2.    Receive the ball by catching it and then bouncing it off some part of your own body from outside of the rham, from the knee up or from the elbow up, over the railing and into the bucket held by your frazsnapper.  Similarly, this is known as the Indirect Direct Method. Moving The Ball  The ball may be passed or punted.   A player may not run while in possession of the ball, nor may a player dribble by hand or by foot down the field.  Two to three steps are allowed to halt forward momentum if receiving the ball while running.   Most teams divide  themselves among defenders, mid-fielders and attackers with liberal overlapping. Time outs: No time outs are permitted to be taken by players.  Referees may call time outs for injuries or for rules explanation. Defense  A defender may tackle the ball at anytime.   Physical contact is allowable, if in the referee’s judgment, the contact is clearly part of the tackling of the ball.   A defensive player may not tie up the offensive player.  Any defensive player wrapping both arms around an offensive player from behind is considered to be tying up the player.  Defense of a player must be from the front, not from behind the offensive player or from the side. Rules for the Frazsnapper   Frazsnapper may not play the ball with his/her hands at any time.  Frazsnapper involves self in offense by catching passes in the bucket or by passing out of the bucket to a teammate. Frazsnapper may scoop up a loose ball inside the rham. Frazsnapper may use his/her feet on a loose ball inside the rham either to scoop up the ball or to kick the ball outside the rham. Frazsnapper may leave the bucket inside the rham in order to join the offense.  No one else may become the frazsnapper during that time. Frazsnapper may use outside of bucket to deflect the ball. After a score the Frazsnapper promptly gets the ball to the referee, who punts or throws the ball, with the objective of having the ball land as close to midfield as possible.  The ball is now in play. A score is made when the Frazsnapper catches a “shot”, as defined above, while s/he is standing in the rham.  The ball may be outside the rham when caught, but it must have passed over one side of the rham before being caught.   Violations and Fouls Violations (1-9) and fouls (10-12)  Moving the ball in any manner other than throwing or punting. Unnecessary roughness, i.e. a player has fouled another player rather than playing the ball. A tie-up between two opposing players results in the ball being thrown up in the air and becoming a free ball.  Move 15 yards further out from the rham if in the proximity of the rham. Delay of game violations or moving the ball further and further away from the normal playing area may result in the ball being awarded to the other team. Field players breaking the vertical plane of the rham, preventing offensive players from passing or shooting, or impeding defensive players from blocking a shot or pass also are violations.  Reaching under the rham with one arm up to the shoulder is permitted though. Warding off another player while in pursuit of a loose ball with one’s body or arms is not permitted. Passing to yourself. Dangerous punting, i.e. while someone is reaching for the ball or at another player. Restricting the movement or motion of another player by encircling them with one’s arms or legs. Individual repeatedly committing egregious fouls or deliberately being rough.  If in the vicinity of the rham a possible scoring situation is interrupted by a violation, a foul may be called. Showing bad sportsmanship towards an opposing player or a fellow teammate.  This includes, but is not limited to, cursing and abusive language. Penalties for violations and fouls  1.    At the point of the violation or after 15 yards have been marked off due to proximity of rham, the ball is given by the referee to a member of the non-offending team to be put back into play by throwing or punting it.  The player restarting play may not be guarded.  2.    For fouls a foul shot may be awarded.  The referee walks off five long strides from the front edge of the non-offending team’s rham.  A shot is then attempted by bouncing the ball off of one’s thigh.  No player may stand in the lane created between the shot taker and the front of the rham.  If the shot is missed, no one may go after the ball until the referee blows the whistle once.     Substitutions     Free substitutions are permitted at anytime during play.     Advantages of the Game Elaborate equipment is not required. Flexible number of players needed to play the game. The game can be played on fields of varying sizes. The skills involved are gross motor skills and as a result the game can be successfully played by people of varying ages and skill levels. The game can be co-ed even though it may not sound like it. The game can be played in almost any weather, including snow, because of the lack of the need for boundaries.  Furthermore, it is a good outdoor winter sport. Friedlefrappe is unique. There are two towers (the Friedleposts), that are placed inside the rhams, with a player with a net in each. Then, on the ground in the rham is a frapper, who has a broom and tries to deflect the shots by all of the players who are running around outside of the rham. The players outside the rham are essentially playing keep-away with a small ball, but can only hold it with one hand. Then to score, they have to toss the ball into the net of the player in their Friedlepost, without it being knocked away by the frapper.  Michael T. McElroy, Class of 2003 How To Play: Friedlefrappe   For quick access, click on the section below: Equipment • Field • Description of the Game • Rules of the Game • Penalties • Advantages of the Game     Equipment Two brooms Two long-handled crab nets One red rubber playground ball six inches in diameter Two towers six feet high Two rhams  Field The rhams are placed side by side, touching, with a tower exactly in the center of each.  There is a chalk line oval drawn on the ground around the rhams, as a scoring boundary. Otherwise, there are no boundaries. (See diagram below)  Fiedlefrappe Field   Description of the Game There are two teams of six players each. (Eight can be used. Six makes it official.)  Inside each rham, there is a Friedlfrapper holding a broom. There is a Friedlsnatcher from the opposite team standing in the tower, holding a crab net. The four other players try to score by throwing the ball into their own snatcher’s net, and prevent the opposite team from doing so.  Initial position of the players: the eight running players must remain outside the rhams. The two Friedlsnatchers are in their towers, and the two Friedlfrappers stand within the rham of the opponent’s snatcher.  To begin the game a coin is tossed by the referee with one of the captains calling, and the winner may choose whether or not to start with the possession of the ball.   The game begins when the starting team’s frapper throws the ball to one of the runners.  There are four eight-minute quarters running time (except for injuries, referee warnings or explanations).     Rules of the Game   Scoring  Each team scores when its Friedlsnatcher catches the ball in its own crab net, except when violations occur on the scoring play.  The ball must be thrown from the player’s hand to the crab net without touching the ground.  However, the ball may bounce from the rham, or the tower, or another player, or a broom, but not the ground.  No score is made, therefore, when the snatcher scoops a ball from the ground.  (See snatcher, rule 3)  If the ball is thrown to the net from inside the chalkline, one point is scored; if thrown from outside the line, two points are scored.  If the ball is hit by your frapper’s broom into your net, five points are scored.     Moving the ball  Players move the ball by:  Running with the ball in one hand (except across the chalk line). Passing the ball (players may catch the ball with both hands).  In order to move the ball across the chalk line, it must be passed. Defense  The ball may be grabbed at any time.  Players must play the ball and not the person.  Teams usually play player-to-player defense, with the four runners all playing defense or all playing offense, depending on who has the ball.  Some teams prefer zone defense, dividing the oval field into quadrants.   Rules for the Frapper  Except for the 5-point score play, the frapper plays a wholly defensive position. The frapper’s objective is to deflect a ball (with the broom) from going into the opposite team’s net, which is of course held in the tower directly above said frapper. The frapper, who must always stay inside the rham, may reach out of the rham with the broom to hit or move the ball into the rham, into the air, or to another player, provided such play is not considered dangerous. The frapper may touch the ball only with the broom, with one exception: after scoring, the frapper receives the ball, handed by the snatcher.  The ball is put back into action in the same manner as the initial play. The frapper and snatcher may not use their net and broom dangerously.  Rules for the Snatcher  The snatcher may touch the ball only with the net except after a score is made, at which time, he/she immediately takes the ball out of the net and promptly hands it down to the opposite team’s frapper. (See rule #4 for frappers) The snatcher may interfere with the frapper’s attempt to get a ball on the ground inside the rham by reaching down with the net to scoop up the ball or to push it out to a player. If the snatcher scoops the ball from the ground into the net, this is not a score, and the ball must be flipped directly from the net, and can’t be touched in any other way by the snatcher. The snatcher must have one foot on the platform at all times. The frapper and snatcher may not use their net and broom dangerously.  Rules for the Runners  Players may not run with two hands on the ball. Players may not kick the ball, dribble with hands or feet, or pass to themselves. Players may not run across the chalk line while holding the ball. After a score is made, the ball must be in the possession of a player on the outside of the chalk line before another score is made. Players may not attack other players directly, or prevent a player’s movement except by grabbing the ball. Players may not hold the ball against their bodies.   Penalties The referee blows the whistle to stop the play, and awards the ball to a player of the opposite team at approximately the locations where the violation occurred.  The chosen player must stand and pass the ball.  He/she can’t be guarded, and may not attempt to score. Chalk line rules  Players may not run over the chalk line with the ball.  The ball must be passed over the chalk line. Players may not stand on the chalk line.    Advantages Elaborate equipment is not required. Flexible number of players needed to play the game. The game can be played on fields of varying sizes. The skills involved are gross motor skills and as a result the game can be successfully played by people of varying ages and skill levels. The game can be co-ed even though it may not sound like it. The game can be played in almost any weather, including snow, because of the lack of the need for boundaries.  Furthermore, it is a good outdoor winter sport. Dating myself, before Friedlefrappe there was Whandango, for the women, played with some strange catapult-like contraption that launched a ball. Then, also for the women, was Hoop-a-Doop, where old 26” bicycle tires were wrassled around up and down the field until one team or the other could throw the hoop (the tire) over the eight or nine-foot pole to score. There were two of these, one at either end of the field. I saw Molly Bennet and another young woman return to Moore Hall one night after a Hoop-a-Doop game bleeding as if they’d been in a prize fight. The games may have been non-contact in nature, but they were certainly played with the fullest enthusiasm by pretty much all concerned.  James C. Brown, Class of 1969 How To Play: Hoop-A-Doop For quick access, click on the section below: Equipment • Field  • Description of the Game •  Rules of the Game • Violations     Equipment At least 30 thin used bicycle tires called hoops Four doops: tall vertical poles seven feet high, set in cement inside of car tires (see photo) Four gates: 2x2’s (see photo) One handkerchief (flag) per player    Field The field contains five marked circles and no outside boundaries.  The center circle is 15 feet in diameter. The four doops are arranged with one at each corner of an unmarked square 50 feet apart, but can be adjusted for the age group.  The gates are placed about 3-4 feet in front of the doops diagonally inside the square.  Hoop-A-Doop Field  Description of the Game There are two teams of six.  Each person begins the game with a handkerchief hanging out of his/her back pocket as in flag football.  Scoring is done by throwing a hoop (bicycle tire) over one of the doops while retaining the handkerchief.  Each team has two doops at opposite corners, and any hoops on those doops add to that team’s score.  The game is composed of four ten-minute quarters.     Rules of the Game  To begin the game, a coin is tossed by the referee with one of the captains calling, and the winner chooses whether or not to start with possession of the first hoop.  The game begins when the team with possession passes the hoop.  The initial position of the players: the player with possession of the first hoop stands inside the circle.  The other players are outside the circle. Players attempt to throw the hoop over their doops while retaining their handkerchiefs.  Scoring is cumulative, e.g., the first hoop on a doop equals one point; the second hoop on the same doop equals two points, etc.  The hoops remain on the doops until the end of each quarter, at which point they are removed.  After each score, the referee gives a new hoop to an opposite team member within the circle.  Players move the hoop by running with the hoop in hand or passing it to another player.  Players may hold the hoop with one or two hands. Defense: the main goal of defense is to pull the handkerchief out of the pocket of an opposite team player holding the hoop.  As the defensive player succeeds in getting the handkerchief, he/she yells, “FLAG” and drops the handkerchief.  The player whose handkerchief has been pulled must immediately drop the hoop and replace the handkerchief in his/her back pocket.  Anyone may grab the hoop off the ground then.  Players also may try to grab the hoop from someone’s hand.  In the event that players of opposing teams are holding on to the hoops, they may continue to do so until one person grabs the hoop, or the flag of one of the two players is pulled. The gates serve as inanimate defensive objects since they prevent players from running directly at their doops. Teams usually do not divide into offensive and defensive players.  When a team has the hoop, they all are offensive, and when the opposite team has the hoop, the first team is defensive.    Violations Players must yell “FLAG” when they pull a flag or the play does not count Players may not yell “FLAG” if they don’t pull a flag. A player must not continue to hold onto the hoop after her/his flag is pulled Knocking down a gate is a violation Unnecessary roughness is a violation How To Play: Nurdley Bawl    For quick access, click on the section below: Equipment • Field  • Description of the Game • Advantages     Equipment Nurdle (an adjustable batting tee about 3 feet high) Nurdle bat (a little league hardball bat sawed off 17 ½ inches from and including the knob) Ball (hard sponge ball about the size of a hardball)   Field The field is similar to a softball field except the angle at home plate is 40 degrees.  The 2 bases are approximately 60 feet down each foul line from the nurdle.  (See diagram, page 35.)  The bunt line as shown in the diagram is drawn from a point 40 feet from the nurdle down one foul line to 40 feet from the nurdle down the other foul line.     Description of the Game Regular baseball (hardball) rules apply with the following exceptions:  Each team has four members, usually first base, third base, short field, and long field. There is not a pitcher or catcher. There is no second base. The ball is put in play by being hit from the nurdle by the batter.  No batter may put the ball in play until the fielders indicate they are ready. Each batter has only one swing per turn; therefore one strike puts a batter out.  If the ball is hit, baseball rules apply, with two exceptions:  Any foul ball is out.  A fair ball which does not go beyond the bunt line is out.  However, a fielder may play the ball inside the bunt line, in which case the ball is in play.  As with any caught fly ball, a runner may tag and advance after a foul fly is caught.  (Smart players, therefore, do not catch foul balls.  Even smarter players help the fielder to know whether the ball will fall fair or foul.) No stealing of bases is allowed.  Runners must be on base when the ball is hit. The game is played in 10 innings. (That’s what makes it nurdley!) Substitutions: Free substitutions so long as no player is at bat more than he/she is in the field and vice versa.     Advantages of the Game The field takes less space than a regular softball field, and can be set up anywhere the grass is mown, e.g., large yards. Because there is no pitcher and only one strike, the game is speeded up, and everyone is more involved. It can be played with only eight total players, e.g., a neighborhood gang. A team’s success depends on each person’s skill more than on the pivotal position of pitcher.   How To Play: Rondoturf For quick access, click on the section below: Equipment • Field  • Description of the Game • Scoring     Equipment 1.    Five croquet wickets 2.    A post 3.    Three stakes arranged in a triangle at each wicket 4.    One basketball 5.    One softball     Field The Rondoturf green consists of a circle about ten feet in diameter and a concentric circle of five wickets and a post.  At each wicket three stakes are arranged in a triangle.     Description of the game Rondoturf is a distant, circular relative of croquet. The wickets and the circle are manned by the six-person teams.  The players in the circle attempt to deflect with a basketball the softball which is bowled by the players at the wickets.  If the softball is deflected, a point is scored, the teams rotate, and the softball changes hands.  If the ball goes through a wicket, the team in possession of the ball continues in the same direction, as they may also do if the center stake is struck by the softball.  Hitting this stake enables that team to take a shot at the post; such a hit is worth two points from one wicket away, four from two wickets away, and six from the farthest wicket.       Scoring 1.    If the softball is deflected a point is scored. 2.    Hitting the post is worth two points from one wicket away, four from two wickets away, and six from the farthest wicket.
https://www.ssfs.org/athletics/our-facilities
Our Athletics Facilities Sandy Spring Friends School's Athletics facilities include two gymnasiums—including an Athletic Complex with a fitness center and 40-foot climbing wall, an on-campus baseball, softball, soccer, and lacrosse fields, as well as six miles of one of the most scenic cross country courses in the area. The Athletic Complex The Athletic Complex was completed in December of 2005 and includes a 9,000-square-foot gymnasium with a regulation-length basketball court and two full-size side courts. The Athletic Complex also includes a 40-foot climbing wall, locker rooms, meeting spaces, an athletic training room, and a fitness center. The fitness center offers free weights, strength machines, treadmills, elliptical trainers, stationary bikes, and other cardio machines. The Yarnall Gymnasium The Yarnall Gym is predominately used for Lower School Physical Education classes and Middle School athletic games. The gym offers a full-basketball court with two short sided courts, rubberized floor which is used for indoor soccer, baseball, and softball, and a drop down baseball/softball batting cage.  Our Athletic Fields Our 140+ acre campus includes three well-maintained athletic fields and six miles of cross country trails. Our fields are in close proximity to each other, allowing for more opportunities for our students and the wider community to support each other during home games and practices.
https://www.ssfs.org/athletics/athletics-alumni
Alumni Athletes Sandy Spring Friends School’s athletics program fosters resilience, stamina, and perseverance, which our ‘Beest athletes carry with them as they continue their athletic pursuits in college and beyond.   Athletes In College  BASKETBALL Mikey Parker '18, Stevenson University Erica Fenton '18, Haverford College Milos Apic '17, Long Beach State University Michael Young ’17 basketball at Centenary University  ICE HOCKEY Sage Bittinger-Esser '16, Juniors Hockey Hartford Jr. Wolfpack  LACROSSE Asa Schauffler '16, Drew University Nick Junkin-Mills ‘16, Randolph College  SOCCER Alex Polon '18 , Widener University Erik Carneal '17, Gettysburg Jordi Martinez '17, Vassar College Talia Klimes '16, High Point University  TRACK AND FIELD Taylor Gunter '15, Goucher College    Prior Years  BASEBALL Stephen Bonser '09, Washington University/South Carolina Matt Ross '09, New York University  CROSS COUNTRY Gillian Kramer '13, Bowdoin College  ICE HOCKEY Aidan Bittinger-Esser '14, Elon University Matt Powers '14, Mount Saint Mary's University  LACROSSE Jabari Canada '12 , Emerson College Gordi Bullen '10, Colorado College  SOCCER Kienan Smith '14, Union College Brenna Connell '13, George Mason University Nick Tait '13, St. Mary's College of Maryland Gabe Oppler '13, Haverford College Kaylin Spicknall '13, Roanoke College Nick DiFazio '12, St. Mary's College of Maryland Braeden Kelly '12, Dickinson College Dylan Smith '12, Alfred University Drew Carneal '11, Dickinson College Reed Milbrath '11, Dickinson College Alyssa Lapp '10, St. Bonaventure University Luke Savonis '10, St. Mary's College of Maryland Mike Davis '05, Occidental College  SWIMMING Kyra Kondis '14, Southern Methodist University  TENNIS Richard King '09, Morgan State University Tom Palley '09, Bucknell University  TRACK AND FIELD Amelia Oliver '11, Bates College  *Note:  SSFS strives to make our Alumni Athletics list as comprehensive as possible. If you know of an athlete who should be included on the list, please let us know.
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life
SSFS student life is enriched by a multitude of clubs, committees, literary pursuits and activities which offer experiential opportunities for intellectual, social and emotional growth. The focus is on developing leadership skills, strengthening interpersonal relations, providing social outlets, acquiring knowledge of and appreciation for the broader community, and encouraging civic responsibility.  The beauty of an SSFS education is that students are never pigeonholed into one area. It's a natural extension of the Quaker principle that there is "that of God" or an "inner Light" in every person. Put into practice, that means we value each person's unique gifts. Consequently, we give our students many routes in the arts, athletics, service, and leadership as well as academics to discover and realize their gifts. We challenge students to stretch their talents and share them with their communities now and moving forward into their lives.  Our boarding and international programs, summer camps, and partnerships with arts, athletics, and academic organizations from the metro Washington, D.C., area mean that there are always variety of activities and opportunities for our students to choose from. Each student and family becomes a part of a diverse and caring community that endures even after students graduate.
https://www.ssfs.org/news-media/weekly-e-newsletter
Gnu Stories, the SSFS all-school newsletter, is sent bi-weekly on Fridays during the school year, and features stories that provide families with a snapshot of school life at SSFS and connects them to the wider community. Supporting Our Scholars & Celebrating Our 60th at the PA Auction!  Each year, the SSFS Parents Association hosts an auction in support of financial aid. As the PA's only major fundraiser, the annual auction is a wonderful and essential community building event—and in a year when nearly 50% of SSFS students are receiving some level of financial aid, the importance of the 2022 auction is greater than ever. This auction, in support of financial aid, will be in-person for the first time in two years. We are thrilled to be able to celebrate our community—and SSFS's 60th anniversary—in person! This issue of the newsletter is dedicated to sharing information about how you can participate!  Live Auction Items Are you craving some quality time with our Head of School, Dr. Rodney Glasgow? What better way than to bond during a mani-pedi session! Be sure to grab your tix to the PA Auction on April 30 so you can bid on this and other priceless experiences in the live auction! Silent Auction Items The silent auction offers some cool options, too - be on the lookout for the Maryland Women in Wine basket, a carefully curated collection of six bottles by the top female winemakers in our state. Many grades have put together class baskets, and you don’t want to miss bidding on them! Virtual Auction Items If you can't come in person to the PA Auction on April 30, visit the virtual PA Online Auction opening April 27. You can bid on priceless faculty experiences, including a visit to the zoo with Middle School science teacher, Alice. Don't miss out on these memorable experiences! FAQs About the Auction Wondering what you should wear? Where you should park? What food and drinks will be available? Click below to find out!  READ MORE ay 14th: SAVE THE DATE and RSVP for Visioning Day Join us in this full-day collaborative workshop as we imagine the future of SSFS through the creation of our next strategic plan. Check-in from 8:00-8:30 AM. Breakfast and lunch will be provided. Please register by April 29, 2022.
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/building-community
Building Community We hold the idea of community in the highest regard. It’s an intentional commitment. At Sandy Spring Friends School we believe in a diverse, collaborative, nonhierarchical community and put an emphasis on affirming and empowering the individual and examining all points of view. Forging strong connections among members of our school community is conducive to both intellectual growth (for understanding complex ideas) and social growth (for instilling respect for others and enabling all students to have an active voice and influence). This culture is guided by our abiding commitment to Quaker values—and a sense of belonging to this community remains with our alumni throughout their lives. Annual All-School All Day Events: Community Day & Our People, Our Planet (OPOP) Day Community Groups made up of faculty, staff, and students from across all three divisions. Peer mentorship programs in the Lower, Middle, and Upper School All-School Assemblies: Beginning of the Year, Winter, and End of Year Assemblies
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/community-service
Community Service At Sandy Spring Friends School, we believe helping others and serving the community are integral parts of the learning process in Quaker education; it is one of the most profound ways you can “Let Your Life Speak.”   Community service encourages students to shift their focus away from their immediate surroundings and social situations and to develop a broader understanding of their world and community. School-wide, grade level, and individual community service projects expose students to a variety of social issues. By helping different groups of people in different situations of need, our students feel the fulfillment that comes from serving others and learn that there are many ways to be of assistance. Our service projects enable students to recognize that they have the skills to be more socially responsible, to embrace the concept of giving of oneself, and to recognize the intrinsic rewards of such labors of love.
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/student-leadership
Student Leadership Leadership at Sandy Spring Friends School is focused on strengthening students’ character and integrity—teaching our students to be honest, empathetic, and collaborative as they work to make lasting positive changes at School and beyond.  Each division at Sandy Spring Friends School offers ample opportunities for student leadership both in and out of the classroom.  Student Leadership Committees are formed in our Lower, Middle, and Upper School, and provide students with opportunities to serve their peers as they facilitate division-level meetings and serve as a conduit between the students and the school administration.  Students also lead clubs, committees, and they mentor other students as well as act as student ambassadors during our Admission events.  Examples of our student leadership opportunities include: Middle School Clerking FLAME- Student Leadership Committee MS Climate Committee Attendance at Quaker leadership conferences Clerking opportunities for student committees  Lower School Clerking SPARK - Student Leadership Committee Grade representatives for SPARK LS Climate Committee  4th grade students reading to 1st graders as a part of the Reading Buddies program Upper School Clerking  TORCH - Student Leadership Committee Club Leadership Editor of The Wildezine, the  student newspaper Attendance at Quaker leadership conferences
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/clubs
Clubs & After School Activities Sandy Spring Friends School offers an abundance of opportunities for students to get involved in clubs and extracurricular activities, on and off campus. There truly is something for everyone. Lower School* After-school clubs offer a variety of interesting opportunities for students to explore and expand extracurricular interests.  Our clubs meet for 7-8 weeks and are offered in three sessions - fall, winter and spring. A snack is provided each week to all students. Clubs meet one day a week. Middle School* During the winter and spring, the Middle School offers after-school clubs to students who want to explore an extracurricular activity.  Middle School clubs run for 6 weeks and meet once a week for an hour. Clubs will start at 4:30 pm on Monday, Tuesday, or Thursday. Upper School Student initiative, interest and expertise are the driving forces behind most of the clubs in the Upper School; therefore, clubs may change each year depending on student interest. This enables the students themselves to determine the focus and direction of co-curricular programming and encourages greater participation in activities.
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/our-boarding-program
A life-changing experience Sandy Spring Friends School offers 5-day and 7-day boarding options for U.S. students and international students.  Families choose SSFS because they are looking for a learning environment that provides the right amount of academic challenge and structure while promoting positive values. Based on Quaker principles, our educational philosophy nurtures the whole student, preparing them for success in college and life beyond. Intentionally diverse Each year we welcome students from all over the world. Our international students make up 27% of the Upper School student body and come from a variety of countries such as China, Italy, South Korea, Tajikistan, Ukraine, Russia, Thailand, Spain, Ghana, Vietnam, Nigeria, Canada, Afghanistan, Equatorial Guinea, Bhutan, Republic of Congo, Japan, Belgium, Mexico, El Salvador, Serbia, Gabon, Iran, Jamaica, and India. Feels like home Our private boarding school offers 5-day and 7-day on-campus dormitory living as well as a high-quality, closely monitored host family program. Both living arrangements provide a safe, supportive, and welcoming environment that provides security while encouraging personal responsibility and self-advocacy. Regardless of where a student lives, they remain an important part of the culture and community at Sandy Spring. Take a Closer Look: SSFS Boarding Program Download our SSFS Boarding Program brochure to get a closer look at our 5- and 7-Day boarding program!
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/dining
At the Westview Dining Hall our menu combines chef-prepared, healthy options, and quality ingredients, including vegetarian options and gluten-free bread (available on request). Part of our menu uses ingredients grown locally right here on campus on our very own farm.  In consideration of our culturally diverse student body, we offer hot food, a deli station, and a fully stocked salad bar, two soup options, and a variety of fruit so that students can make the choice that works best for them. The Westview Dining Hall beverage options include milk, lemonade, tea, fruit-infused water, and still water.  All Sandy Spring Friends School students gather in the Westview Dinging Hall for lunch, and boarding students also enjoy breakfast and dinner in Westview.
https://www.ssfs.org/school-life/student-support-services
Student Support Services Working together, the school nurses, counselors, and learning specialists make up the Student Support Services Group (SSS).With an eye toward the development of preschool-Grade 12 health support and education, SSS works collaboratively to identify areas of need and the resources necessary to fill such needs.   The Student Support Services Group works with our entire community of parents, students, faculty, and staff by proactively providing education on a variety to topics and responding to crises affecting the community. Student Support Services at SSFS: Consists of the nurses, the learning specialists, and the counselors Aims to assist students requiring help Strives to maintain confidentiality in all forms, including electronic and written communication, conferences and phone conversations as outlined in the community handbook Serves the student resource teams in the appropriate divisions and seeks out the advice of these teams when necessary Addresses many health, learning, and counseling issues Provides referrals to outside resources including therapists, psychiatrists, pediatricians, academic tutors, and/or organizational tutors when situations arise beyond the capabilities of the student support position Examines educational and psychological testing and assists families Meets regularly to address the physical, mental, social and educational needs of the school community Develops the Health and Wellness program by writing curriculum, teaching Life Skills classes, arranging appropriate speakers, and providing written supportive materials The two registered nurses (RNs) work with students in each division offering the following core services:  yearly hearing and vision screening generalized healthcare monitoring of chronic health conditions oversight of all health records symptomatic assessments and follow-up care delivery of health curriculum liaison between student, school and medical professionals/ specialists The learning specialists in all divisions offer the following core services:  consultation with parents, students, teachers, and outside professionals about learning needs help the teachers implement recommendations and accommodations faculty/student workshops about how students learn and study assistance with the identification of learning differences development of strategies with students to help them adapt to their learning styles offering referrals to outside resources (tutors, speech and language therapists, psycho/educational testing services, etc.) There is a counselor in each division of the school, and in our residential life program. The academic training of our counselors includes social work and school counseling. School counselors offer the following core services:  individual and group counseling conflict resolution, life transition counseling, and assistance with cultural adjustments teach grade appropriate health and life skills classes addressing topics such as social, emotional, and physical development support teachers in working with students and families educate students, parents and faculty about mental health concerns act as a student advocate refer to mental health providers in the community The Upper School boarding program and international student program have unique needs and receive additional support including the following:  Registered Nurses  provide health and medical oversight of all dorm students refer students to local medical specialists as needed oversee immunizations oversee international student insurance offer health consultations with parents and guardians of dorm students Dormitory Counselor  provides monthly classes on adolescent health and wellness topics oversees student safety and well being oversees study and social program trained medical technicians Learning Specialists  are available to assist students with learning issues provides referrals for tutors and educational testing Counselors  College counselors guide the search and application process US Counselor teaches Life Skills Course to 9th Graders and provides counseling to students during the school day
